JAVA INHERITANCE

1.  Introduction Inheritance is one of the core concepts of
    Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) in Java. It allows one class to
    acquire the properties (fields) and behaviors (methods) of another
    class. The class that is inherited from is called the superclass
    (parent), and the class that inherits is called the subclass
    (child).

2.  Purpose of Inheritance

-   Code reusability
-   Improved code organization
-   Easier maintenance
-   Supports polymorphism

3.  Basic Syntax Inheritance in Java is implemented using the ‘extends’
    keyword.

Example: class Parent { void display() { System.out.println(“This is the
parent class”); } }

class Child extends Parent { void show() { System.out.println(“This is
the child class”); } }

4.  Types of Inheritance in Java Java supports the following types of
    inheritance using classes:

-   Single Inheritance One subclass inherits from one superclass.

-   Multilevel Inheritance A class is derived from another derived
    class.

-   Hierarchical Inheritance Multiple subclasses inherit from one
    superclass.

Note: Java does NOT support multiple inheritance using classes (but it
supports it using interfaces).

5.  The ‘super’ Keyword The ‘super’ keyword is used to:

-   Access superclass variables
-   Call superclass methods
-   Call superclass constructors

Example: super.display();

6.  Method Overriding Method overriding occurs when a subclass provides
    a specific implementation of a method already defined in its
    superclass.

Rules: - Method name and parameters must be the same - Access level
cannot be more restrictive - @Override annotation is recommended

7.  Access Modifiers and Inheritance

-   public: accessible everywhere
-   protected: accessible in same package or subclass
-   default: accessible in same package only
-   private: NOT inherited

8.  Advantages of Inheritance

-   Reduces code duplication
-   Enhances extensibility
-   Improves readability

9.  Disadvantages of Inheritance

-   Tight coupling between classes
-   Misuse can lead to fragile designs

10. Conclusion Inheritance is a powerful feature in Java that promotes
    reusability and supports OOP principles. It should be used carefully
    to maintain clean and flexible code.
